How does data science happen?
Five P's of data science.
Now that we identified what data science
is and how companies can strategize around
big data to start building a purpose,
let's come back to using data science
to get value out of big data around
the purpose or questions they defined.
Our experience with building and
observing successful data science projects
led to a method around the craft with
five distinct components that can be
defined as components of data science.
Here we define data science
as a multi-disciplinary
craft that combines
people teaming up around
application-specific purpose that
can be achieved through a process,
big data computing platforms,
and programmability.
All of these should lead to
products where the focus really
is on the questions or purpose that are
defined by your big data strategy ideas.
There are many technology,
data and analytical research, and
development related activities
around the questions.
But in the end, everything we do
in this phase is to reach to that
final product based on our purposes.
So, it makes sense to start with it and
build a process around how
we make this product happen.
Remember the wild fire
prediction project I described?
One of the products we described
there was the rate of spread and
direction of an ongoing fire.
We have identified questions and
the process that led us to
the product in the end to solve it.
We brought together experts around
the table for fire modeling,
data management, time series analysis,
scalable computing,
Geographical Information Systems,
and emergency response.
I asked them,
let's not dive into the techniques yet.
What is the problem at large?
How do we see ourselves solving it?
A typical conversation around
the process starts with this question.
Then from then on,
drilling down to many areas of expertise,
often we blur lines between the steps.
My wildfire team would start listing
things like, we don't have an integrated
system or we don't have real-time
access to data programmatically,
so we can't analyze fires on the fly.
Or they can say, I can't integrate
sensor data with satellite data.
All of this leads me to challenges
I can then use to define problems.
There are many dimensions of data science
to think about within this discussion.
Let's start with the obvious ones,
people and purpose.
People refers to a data science team or
the projects stakeholders.
As you know by now,
they're expert in data and
analytics, business, computing,
science, or big data management,
like all the set of experts I
listed in my wildfire scenario.
The purpose refers to the challenge or
set of challenges defined by your
big data strategy, like solving the
question related to the rate of spread and
direction of the fire perimeter
in the wildfire case.
Since there's a predefined team
with a purpose, a great place for
this team to start with is
a process they could iterate on.
We can simply say, people with purpose
will define a process to collaborate and
communicate around.
The process is conceptual
in the beginning and
defines the set of steps an how
everyone can contribute to it.
There are many ways to
look at the process.
One way of looking at it is
as two distinct activities,
mainly big data engineering and
big data analytics, or
computational big data science,
as I like to call it, as more than simple
analytics is being performed here.
A more detailed way of looking at
the process reveals five distinct steps or
activities of this data science process,
namely acquire, prepare,
analyze, report, and act.
We can simply say that
data science happens
at the boundary of all these steps.
Ideally, this process should
support experimental work and
dynamic scalability on the big data and
computing platforms.
This five step process can be used in
alternative ways in real life big data
applications, if we add the dependencies
of different tools to each other.
The influence of big data pushes for
alternative scalability approaches
at each step of the process.
Just like you would scale
each step on its own,
you can scale the whole
process as a whole in the end.
One can simply say, all of these steps
have reporting needs in different forms.
Or there is a need to draw all these
activities as an iterating process,
including build, explore, and
scale for big data as steps.
Big data analysis needs alternative
data management techniques and
systems, as well as analytical tools and
methods.
Multiple modes of scalability is needed
based on dynamic data and computing loads.
In addition,
change in physical infrastructure,
streaming data specific urgencies
arising from special events
can also require multiple
modes of scalability.
In this intro course, for simplicity,
we will refer to the process as a set of
five sequential activities that iterate.
However, we'll touch on scalability as
needed in our example applications.
As a part of building
your big data process,
it's important to simply
mention two other P's.
The first one is big data platforms,
like the ones in the Hadoop framework,
or other computing platforms
to scale different steps.
The scalability should be in
the mind of all team members and
get communicated as an expectation.
In addition, the scalable process
should be programmable through
utilization of reusable and
reproducible programming interfaces
to libraries, like systems middleware,
analytical tools,
visualization environments, and
end user reporting environments.
Thinking of big data
applications as a process,
including a set of activities that
the team members can collaborate over,
also helps to build metrics for
accountability to be built into it.
This way, expectations on cost, time,
optimization of deliverables,
and time lines can be discussed
between the the members starting with
the beginning of the data science process.
Sometimes we may not be able
to do this in one step.
And joint explorations like statistical
evaluations of intermediate results or
accuracy of sample data
sets become important.
As a summary, data science can be
defined as a craft of using the five P's
identified in this lecture,
leading to a sixth P, the data product.
Having a process within the more
business-driven Ps, like people and
purpose, and the more technically
driven P's, like platforms and
programmability, leads to
a streamlined approach that starts and
ends with the product, team
accountability, and collaboration in mind.
Data science process
provides guidelines for
implementing big data solution,
as it helps to organize efforts and
ensures all critical steps taken conforms
to pre-define and agreed upon metrics.